The rape and killing of a 31-year-old woman medical resident has touched off protests across India as the country grapples with inadequate protections for women and increasing reports of gender-based violence.
The demonstrations began in Kolkata — the capital of the eastern Indian state of West Bengal — following the woman’s rape and killing, which took place on August 9 at a medical school. They’ve since spread to other states, as well as the country’s capital, New Delhi.
The death of the trainee is just the latest of several high-profile recent incidents of gender-based violence in India, and it comes at a time when sexual violence appears to be on the rise: According to the National Crime Records Bureau, there was a 20 percent increase in reported rapes in 2022 compared to 2021.
The Indian government implemented stricter laws against sexual- and gender-based violence, as well as some national strategies to address it, following international outcry over the 2012 case of a young woman who was gang raped and killed on a bus. But as the current tragedy and other high-profile cases suggest, those laws have not ended India’s systemic problems with gender-based violence, and now, many of the protesters say they’ve had enough.
As part of the protests, thousands of doctors (by some estimates, hundreds of thousands of doctors) have left their posts. On Saturday, doctors across the country — led primarily by women — held a 24-hour strike. Over the past few days, some physicians, such as a group of doctors in New Delhi, have attempted to set up limited free care as part of their demonstrations, and most have refused to see non-emergency patients. Government officials have demanded that the protesting doctors return to work as usual; they have refused until their demands are met.
Political leaders have called for justice. In an address on August 15 — India’s independence day — Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, without mentioning the Kolkata rape and death, that everyone in the country must “seriously think about the kind of atrocities which are taking place against our mothers, sisters, daughters” and that “crime against women should be investigated more urgently.”
As of now, the investigation into the rape and death continues, as do renewed calls for India to strengthen legal protections for medical professionals generally and women specifically.

